This is session 807, Bluetooth In-Depth.
And with that,
I'd like to introduce Michael Larson,
who is the manager of
Bluetooth Engineering at Apple.
Thanks, Tom.
I'd like to welcome everyone
to WWDC this week again.
I'm here to talk to you about Bluetooth,
what kind of code we've
written to support Bluetooth,
what the APIs that we're
going to provide to you in an
SDK later this afternoon are,
and what you can do by expanding on our
support of Bluetooth using our APIs to
make applications that support Bluetooth.
and use our APIs to make it even better.
I'm going to start off with a brief
description of Bluetooth technology,
an overview of the technology,
including the terms
used in the technology,
how RF implementations are
built up between two devices,
and how data gets transferred
between the devices.
I'll follow that up with an
overview of our implementation
of Bluetooth technology,
including the framework that we provide,
and the objects that you can use to use
our framework to develop applications.
Also included in that will be our
kernel objects that you can use to
write drivers for new and special
hardware using different transport types
that Apple does not provide support for.
We'll kick it off with Bluetooth basics,
how Bluetooth works,
and basic terminology
terms for Bluetooth,
then go into Apple's implementation,
show you how to find devices,
query the services that
are on those devices,
and open the different channel types
to transfer data between devices.
So what is Bluetooth?
We started looking at Bluetooth some
time ago and implementing what
we've released now in Preview 2.
Bluetooth is a very low-bandwidth,
short-range wireless protocol.
As you heard in the
previous presentation,
if you attended that,
we intended to be used for peripherals
and not as a networking protocol because
of its low bandwidth and short range.
In order to get data to
transfer over Bluetooth,
it happens over a series
of layered protocols.
At the very bottom,
there's a baseband connection.
A baseband connection represents
the lowest level RF link
between two radio devices.
On top of this baseband
connection to transfer data,
there's a protocol called L2CAP.
L2CAP is, we'll go into that a
little more in depth later,
but it's a basic data transfer protocol.
On top of L2CAP,
Bluetooth has built a thing called RFCOM.
RFCOM is a serial emulation layer.
We'll also go into that later.
And an additional protocol
on top of RFCOM is OBEX.
If any of you were involved
in the old IR days,
you might remember OBEX as it's a
protocol left over from those days.
Bluetooth devices are
identified by a 6-byte address.
It's identical to an Ethernet address.
In fact,
it's assigned by the same organization.
So if you use Apple's preview
implementation and the D-Link card,
you'll find that the device address that
you get for Bluetooth is actually the
same as your built-in Ethernet address.
So let's get into some more
of the basics of Bluetooth.
In order to build connections,
there are really two
modes a device can be in.
A device can be either discoverable
or connectable or both.
They're really independent states.
So what does it mean to be discoverable?
When a device is discoverable,
a remote device can use what's known
as an inquiry to find that device.
If you saw the Bluetooth demo
in the last presentation,
there was an inquiry done there to
find all other devices within range.
This is a generic mechanism used to
find the devices that are within that
30-foot range of Bluetooth connectivity.
So that is a mode that you will
put your device in if you want
to be able to be found by others.
Sometimes that's not a good thing,
so we provide the
ability to turn that off.
For example, cell phones,
a lot of times you don't
want to be able to be found,
but you'd like to connect them.
So that takes us into the next
aspect of the Bluetooth connectivity,
which is connectable.
It's a different concept
than discoverable,
so that if devices are looking
for you and you're connectable,
you won't respond to inquiry requests.
But if they know about you
explicitly through a prior inquiry,
or someone's provided
you the device address,
they will be able to build a connection.
This way, you can design a device
that can allow connections,
but will not be found if
someone's trying to just,
for example,
show up in this hall and find
out what other devices are
around and cause trouble.
So they're mutually exclusive states.
You can use those to design devices
and design them so that they behave
exactly like you would want them to,
and users can control that
behavior independently.
There are a number of security
concepts with Bluetooth.
The first one is a paired relationship.
If you can create a paired relationship
between two different devices so
that you no longer have to do some
initial setup or ask for passwords
each time you connect-- for example,
I've paired my Bluetooth laptop
with my Bluetooth phone so that
all future connections happen
without any user intervention.
Pairing works by using a shared secret
that's never transmitted across the air.
That secret's known as a passkey.
So the first time I go to
pair my laptop with my phone,
I enter the same passkey on both devices.
And that passkey is used
to create a link key.
That link key is stored inside the
hardware and also on the computer
so it can be provided for future
connections without user intervention.
Link keys can also be deleted so
that if you want to delete that
paired relationship with a device,
you can do that.
Another security concept
with Bluetooth is encryption.
A Bluetooth link can require encryption
or it cannot require encryption.
That's up to the particular service type.
An encryption is done
inside the hardware.
One of the items used to determine
the encryption is the link key,
so that encryption is very
useful for paired devices.
The link key is used as a seed to the
encryption engine to provide 128-bit
encryption for the Bluetooth connection.
That covers the basic introduction
to Bluetooth technology,
and we're going to cover
where we position it here.
We really view it on this slide
as a peripheral technology
using a wireless connection.
It doesn't mean that USB and
FireWire devices are going away.
They have much higher speed,
but also have the burden of cables.
This is for very low-bandwidth devices
that can really use the cable to be cut.
So cell phones are an obvious choice.
PDAs are another good choice,
and there are several other out there.
And that's what we would like to see
you guys start to get into and find
those other cables to cut and provide
some other functionality over Bluetooth.
We released Preview 1 about a
month ago at Macworld Tokyo.
Preview 2 is going to be released
this afternoon and really doesn't
add any new profile support but
adds some additional UI and polish
to what we did in Preview 1.
What we support in Preview 1 and also
Preview 2 are three primary profiles.
The first being dial-up networking.
Dial-up networking replaces the
IR or serial cable link that would
previously exist between a laptop
and a cell phone with Bluetooth.
The serial port profile also replaces
the cable that would previously
exist between a PDA and a laptop.
And then object push enables a quick
exchange of objects or small files
between two Bluetooth-enabled devices.
This can be used to quickly
exchange a small file about
several hundred K or so between a
PDA and a laptop or two laptops,
or send a V-card to your phone so you
don't have to enter it on the keypad.
So let's get into what the
Bluetooth stack looks like.
At the very bottom of the stack,
there's a Bluetooth module.
That'll be a hardware device,
rather it be a USB device like we
have with the D-Link module that
we introduced about a month ago,
or it's a serial controller,
or a PC card,
whatever type of transport it is,
there's a Bluetooth module.
On top of that, there are several other
protocols and profiles that are
used to talk to that module,
and we'll go into those in a little
more depth in the following slides.
The first layer that's used to
talk to a Bluetooth module is HCI.
HCI stands for host controller interface.
It's an abstraction to be able to
send commands and receive events
and transfer data to the radio.
So using a well-defined
protocol called HCI,
we can talk to any type of
Bluetooth device over USB or
serial or PCI as long as it
conforms to the HCI protocol.
And a driver needs to be written
underneath this to transmit the data in
the HCI format into whatever bus it is.
Apple's provided a USB driver.
There are currently no other
drivers that Apple provides.
That's an opportunity for you guys.
To go write a serial one if you want
to support a serial device or PC card,
whatever else there is out there.
On top of HCI, we need a layer,
a protocol layer,
to transmit data between two devices.
This layer is called L2CAP.
It's a link control layer to transfer
simple data between two devices.
Once there's a baseband connection,
which is created using an HCI call,
you can use L2CAP calls to
open independent channels and
transfer data between two devices.
L2CAP supports a number of things,
including different channel
types and channel IDs,
and one of its primary goals is to
segment and reassemble different packets
according to the maximum packet size.
On top of L2CAP is RFCOM.
RFCOM's primary purpose in life
is to make a data channel appear
to be a legacy serial port.
So it has mechanisms to open
multiplex data channels.
You can have several channels over
an L2CAP channel to a remote device.
And on top of that,
it adds some primitives
to set serial port speeds.
So if you were actually talking to a
device that had a real serial port,
you could control those speed settings
like it were a real serial cable.
And an RFCOM channel,
or the multiple RFCOM channels,
will use a single L2CAP channel as
its transport to the remote device.
Kind of a peer to RFCOM in terms of
them both using an L2CAP channel is SDP.
SDP is a service discovery protocol,
and it is used to query remote devices
about what services they support.
So if you have a remote device that
you found through a prior inquiry,
and you want to know whether it supports
the service you're interested in,
you can use SDP to query that device
and find out whether it supports it.
You can query it as to whether it
supports a serial port profile,
and it will respond with all its services
that are serial port profile services.
Or you can query it as to whether
it supports dial-up networking,
and it will tell you whether
it supports dial-up networking.
It also uses an L2CAP channel
as its transport,
and there's a single
L2CAP channel to be used for SDP.
On top of RFCOM, there is OBEX.
OBEX,
if any of you know it from the IR days,
is an HTTP-like protocol,
and it transfers simple
objects to another device.
It uses primitives like PUT and
GET to transfer blocks of data.
The OBEX protocol is based on the V1.2
version of the IR OBEX specification.
This is an area where Bluetooth has said,
there's already something that exists
out there in the world that does the
data transfer the way we want to.
We'll just leverage that and map
those rules onto Bluetooth technology
rather than IR technology,
and we'll get all the other
applications that know OBEX for free.
OBEX uses an RFCOM channel as
its transport because of the
similarities between IRTA and serial.
So that's the description of all the
Bluetooth protocols and how they're used.
It's a brief description.
Now, in order to use those on
Mac OS X with either Puma or Jaguar,
we're releasing a SDK.
It should be on the web this afternoon,
and the URL will be available
later in the presentation.
And alongside the SDK,
we're also posting Preview Release 2
for the end users that might want to
upgrade their software and see what the
latest support we have for Bluetooth is.
In terms of the SDK,
there's two important things to know.
One is it's a superset,
a complete superset of Preview Release 2.
So if you install the SDK,
you do not need Preview Release 2.
It's all included there.
The SDK installs header files and
the frameworks you need to develop
applications using Bluetooth,
which Preview Release 2 does not install.
And there are two separate
SDK versions since you guys
just got a Jaguar Preview CD.
We've developed one
that works under Jaguar,
and there's a separate one for Puma.
So whichever version of the OS you
feel comfortable developing for,
there's SDKs for both of those.
What is the SDK going to give you?
We provide access to a number
of APIs through the SDK.
The first two are our in-kernel APIs,
the HCI controller,
which is the bottom block on the
stack diagram we just covered,
and then the USB HCI controller,
which is Apple's specific implementation
of an HCI controller to work over USB.
HCI, we'll cover those in-depth
in the next slide.
There's also a number of
user-level APIs that we provide.
We provide objects that
represent a Bluetooth device,
an L2CAP channel, an RF-COM channel,
or an OBEX session.
We also provide objects that represent
the service discovery profile objects
that exist between two devices.
Looking at the kernel objects,
the first is the
IO Bluetooth HCI controller.
It's a representation of
a generic HCI controller.
This is the base class that you
want to look at if you want to
write an I/O Kit driver for a
different type of Bluetooth hardware,
i.e.
a PC card or something that
Apple does not provide.
The class is available in the SDK and the
documentation is available there as well.
In addition to the base HCI controller,
we have a USB HCI controller.
If you have a USB bit of hardware
that more or less works with
our class driver implementation,
because our USB driver in the
preview release and the SDK is
a generic USB class driver,
but it adds some
additional features like,
say, a special LED to show something,
you can subclass this to add these
special features for your USB device.
In terms of what Apple has
done support for,
Apple's supporting the USB driver,
and we have not looked at
any other transports now.
So if you have hardware
that uses the other one,
this is a good opportunity to
provide the driver for that hardware.
Getting into the user space objects.
The way that the Bluetooth API is
designed from the user space,
it's very object-oriented.
There are objects to represent
all the different channels and
the remote devices on the system.
We also provide both a C version
and an Objective-C version of
the APIs for the Bluetooth stack.
In addition to that,
we've also provided some common
UI elements so that you can call
and don't have to handle things
like inquiries or SDP searches.
You can just call one of our UI elements,
and we will bring up the UI and
search for devices and do the service
discovery to find exactly the device
or the service you're interested in.
In order to provide similarity
between the C version and
the Objective-C version,
we've adopted a naming convention,
which is shown on the slide.
The C version tacks on a
ref to the end of what the
Objective-C version name would be.
So getting into the IO Bluetooth device.
This is the one object in our stack that
you can have that really does not need to
have a concrete representation behind it.
An IO Bluetooth device can be created
and can represent a remote device
for which there is no connection.
These devices can either be created
programmatically by code if you know
the device address or have saved that
off from a previous device search.
In addition to that,
this is the root object that you will
use to create any type of connection
you would like to a remote device.
The baseband connection
is started from here.
You can open L2CAP channels using
the device as the root object.
You can also open RFCOM channels,
and it's used for
OBEX session connections.
In addition, if you want to do any kind
of SDP service searches,
the device is really the important
part to remember and use to
do those service searches.
On top of the device,
there's a Bluetooth L2CAP channel.
These can exist.
I said before that the device is the
only one that can exist without a
concrete representation behind it.
It's really the only one that
can be created without a concrete
representation behind it.
The rest of the channels,
like an L2CAP channel or future channels,
can exist,
but they will have to be created when a
concrete channel representation exists.
They will exist after the
channel goes away behind it,
but will return errors for all the calls.
An IO Bluetooth L2CAT channel represents
the data conduit between the local device
you're running on and a remote device.
Using that data conduit,
there are commands to open the channel,
read and write data to
and from the channel,
and close the channel.
And following the naming convention,
there's a C version that
tacks on the ref to the name.
On top of L2CAP,
we have the IO Bluetooth RF Comp channel.
Similarly to L2CAP,
there are APIs to open, read, write,
or close a channel.
There are, in addition,
event notifications, and incoming data is
considered an event type.
But other event types for RFCOM might
be changing the serial port
speed or some other bits of the
serial port emulation things that
RFCOM handles and was designed to do.
Also, following the naming convention,
just tack on the ref to the end
of the name to get the C version.
For implementation of the
service discovery profile,
there are three things that you can do.
You can create a service to Vend.
If you write an application
that's Bluetooth-aware and say
you wanted to provide a chat
application over Bluetooth,
you would create a special chat service
and Vend that from your chat application,
and that would enter our service database
to be Vended for other devices to query.
If you're writing the chat
client on another machine,
you will use the SDP APIs to go query
remote devices and find out if they
support the chat service and then
exist and what channel that's on.
There are a number of
SDP-specific classes,
including the service record,
the service attribute, data element,
and UUID.
and their C versions for all those APIs.
So a UUID is it's a UUID and the typical,
if you've used Core Foundation,
they have UUID services.
It's a 128-bit value that can
be reduced down to 16 or 32 bits
to represent a unique service.
The Bluetooth Special Interest Group has
defined a number of generic UUIDs.
For example,
serial port has one or dial-up
networking has another.
If you were to create a chat
service that was your specific one,
you would generate your own
128-bit value one and use that
to identify the chat service.
The data element and service attribute
classes are used to extract data from
a service record and tell whether that
service has the attribute of chat or
dial-up networking or whatever other
type of service you're looking for.
On top of RF-COM, there's OBEX,
which is the generic object exchange.
OBEX transfers happen
through an OBEX session.
There's both a client session object
and a service session object that
both work over an RF-COM channel.
The current API that we're providing
in the SDK requires a pretty in-depth
knowledge of the OBEX protocol in
terms of knowing when to respond
to different portions of things.
We do plan on releasing a
convenience API that will handle
a lot of that for you if you
don't want to get that in-depth.
In addition to that,
we plan to provide some simple
file transfer services if you
just want to transfer a file
from one device to another.
That's coming in a future
version of the SDK.
What is provided in the SDK today
are some simple OBEX header parsing
utilities and creation utilities.
In addition to that, to simplify OBEX,
we've provided some vCard or vObject,
as we call them, creation utilities,
so you can create a vCard or a
vCalendar event from code easily.
So you've got your idea that you
want to implement over Bluetooth.
Now you need to know how to do it.
There are three UI elements
that you might want to use to
either pair with the device,
find a particular service,
or just find a remote device.
These UI objects have common aspects
in terms of their ability to filter
on different types of devices,
so you can find only phones
or only laptops or whatever
device type you would like.
They also have the ability to
filter out to only certain services,
so if you're only interested
in devices that have your
chat service as an example,
you can filter out only those devices.
The first device is the pairing panel.
If any of you had a chance
to play with Preview 1,
you've probably seen this when you've
connected to your Bluetooth phone,
if you've done that.
This is a common UI element
available to any application,
which is Bluetooth Aware.
You can use this element to
find and create a paired device
relationship between your
computer and a remote device.
The second panel that's
available through our API in the
SDK is a service search panel.
This handles all the aspects of doing
the finding remote devices and doing
the service searches for those devices.
You can tell this panel when you
call it to look for certain device
types or only certain service types,
and it will handle all the
SDP transactions for you so you don't
have to go learn how to do that code
and how to parse out those responses.
All you need to do is provide the
service type that you're interested in,
and we can filter that out for you.
So this will return to you
a list of the device and the
service that the user selected,
and you can go do things on that.
We have a code example later
that exhibits how this works.
And then the third panel
is a device search panel.
For example,
if you're doing a file transfer
application thing or if you want
to send a vCard to somebody,
you may want to send it to
several devices at once.
This is a UI panel we've created
to allow the user to select one or
multiple devices and return those to
the application so they can decide
how many files to send to remote
devices and how to handle that.
Now we have some code examples.
What we've done here is
the elements in orange,
we've highlighted orange to show
that it's either an API name
or one of the data types that
we've defined for Bluetooth use.
So the first example we're going to
step through here is a C code example.
We also have an
Objective-C version coming later.
And this example uses an RF com
channel to open up and transfer
data between two devices.
There's really four elements that
you will need to do if you want to
open a remote connection to a device.
The first is a reference
to that remote device.
The second is the service record to find
out what the services are on that device.
And if you're dealing
with RF com channel,
the last two are an RF com
channel reference and the
ID number of that channel.
So for the first step of finding
the device to connect to,
the first call is the
IO Bluetooth Service Browser
Controller Browse Devices.
That's our API to bring up the service
browser to find all the devices within
range and list the services on them.
It will return to you a service
record that gets filled out based
on which service the user selected.
On top of the,
one of the calls into the SDP services
on a service record will return you
exactly which device was selected.
Using that call,
you can find out what device,
what remote device the user selected,
and that returns to you
an IO Bluetooth device.
Once you have the device,
you can also query the SDP info that
was returned to find out which RF com
channel number that service is on.
It's an important bit of data
to know that you're opening
the proper RF com channel.
So once we get to this
portion of the slide,
we've already got the remote
device that we want to talk to,
and we have the channel ID of the
channel we want to open on that device.
So the first step is to create the
connection to that remote device.
That's the first call
that you see up there.
That will go and page the remote device.
It will answer back,
and an RF link will be established
between the two devices.
Once we have that initial
RF link between the two devices,
we need to open the other
layered protocols on top of that.
If you recall back
from the layered slide,
on top of ACI there's
L2CAP and then RFCOM.
If you're interested
in the RFCOM channel,
we open the L2CAP channel for
that automatically for you.
All you need to do is request
for that channel to be opened.
That's the second call you see there.
Once you've made that second call,
now you have an open RF com
channel that you can use to
transfer data between two devices.
The next step you must do with
RFCOM is to register an incoming
listener for that RFCOM channel.
That way you will get notified
of incoming data or incoming
event types over RFCOM.
So you register that on
the third line there.
Also, the fifth line shows the function
declaration for that if you're curious.
Then the next step,
you now have an open RF comm channel.
You can start transferring data.
There's an example of the write call.
Send data on the write call.
You'll get data back on the
read or on the event listener.
And from there,
you've got an open conduit
to a remote device.
The next example is the
Objective-C version.
For those of you who are coming
from the next days or have
been around OS X for a while,
it's just a little different.
And to change things
around for this example,
instead of using RFCOM,
we use L2CAP as a different
channel type to use.
It just looks slightly different.
It's very similar to the C version.
The first step is to call the
service browser controller.
A little different look
because it's Objective C,
but it's the same idea.
Service record browser
controller will run.
The user will select the device,
and it will return that to
you in the service record.
Then, using the service record,
you can get the remote device that
was a part of that service record.
You can also, the same way there is a
RFCOM channel ID for RFCOM channels,
the same concept for
L2CAP is called a PSM.
So you can get the L2CAP PSM from
the service record.
And now you have all the information
you need to go and open that particular
channel for that remote device.
Using that information,
slightly different than RFCOM,
opening an L2CAP channel
automatically handles the
opening the baseband connection.
So if you're doing L2CAP,
we don't need to open the
baseband connection ahead of time.
That gets handled for us.
Just tell the remote device to open
a particular RFCOM channel with
the parameters we're interested in.
That returns to us an
L2CAP channel object.
Using that L2CAP channel object,
we can now register for
incoming data to come into us
on a particular data listener,
which is my data listener up there.
And then we can start
writing to the channel.
Data will come in on
our listener routine,
and we've got all the pieces we
need to communicate to a remote
device over an L2CAP channel.
So as part of the SDK,
we've provided a series
of sample applications.
A lot of them work over OBEX.
They're all listed there.
OBEX Quick Push is a quick sample
application to transfer a file
or a vCard or any other type of
data from one machine to another.
The complete sample code is there.
Obix Sample Send vCard allows
you to enter in address and
telephone contact information,
and it will package that up
as a vCard data object and
send that to a remote device.
Similar,
you can enter address book entries
onto your Bluetooth phone that way,
all sample codes there.
The two RFCOM sample applications,
the Client Sample and the Server Sample,
are actually an RFCOM chat application.
They exhibit how to create a service,
then that service on your
local Bluetooth device,
and then the Client Sample exhibits how
to connect to a remote Bluetooth device
that sends a service you're interested
in and open up an RFCOM sample
to transfer data back and forth.
In addition to the sample code,
we provided object code
for two different tools.
One thing,
if you're doing Bluetooth development,
you're really interested in
what the data is that's being
transferred between the two devices,
both HCI commands and events
and also the L2CAP or RFCOM data
that's being transferred.
The Packet Decoder 2
application is just this.
It logs every single HCI command
or HCI event as well as all the
ACL or L2CAP data being transferred.
And it will decode that according to
the different specification protocols.
Currently,
we decode the Service Discovery Protocol,
L2CAP protocol, and RFCOM,
although we have been thinking
about adding decoding options for
different protocols as they're needed.
In addition to that,
there's also an application
called Bluetooth Monitor.
If you're developing your Bluetooth code
and sometimes the Bluetooth connection
remains live because your app
crashed or something and you
want to go kill that connection,
Bluetooth Monitor will list all existing
connections and channels between devices,
and you can kill off those channels
or connections independently.
So it's a handy little tool as you're
developing Bluetooth stuff when you
get into trouble and just want to
knock things down and start over again.
It can do that for you.
There's some other presentations
that touch on Bluetooth.
The only other one at WWDC this week
was a session just prior to this one.
So there's not much you can do
about it now other than if you
get the DVDs and slide sets,
you might want to go look at that
one to find out what Apple's future
plans are with Bluetooth and also
how it integrates with 802.11.
For future contact information,
the person to start off your
initial contacts with is Tom Weier.
He'll be joining me on stage in just
a few moments to handle the Q&A,
and he was the person who introduced me.
In addition to that,
we've set up a developer mailing list.
The URL is listed there.
The entire Bluetooth team
will be monitoring that,
so feel free to ask questions.
Whatever you need there,
we'll be monitoring that
for what you want from us.
And here are a series of links for
more information about Bluetooth.
There's a link provided for
our SDK that you should be able
to download this afternoon.
In addition to that,
the Bluetooth specifications available
online and other specifications
which the Bluetooth specification
uses are also available online.
So if you're looking for any of
the specifications referred to
in the initial Bluetooth spec,
there are some URLs to start looking at.
In addition, as Tom mentioned in the
presentation before,
we found one book that we really
like that simplifies the description
of all the Bluetooth stuff.
As a specification,
it's about 1,600 pages.
It's a little dry, a lot to read.
Bluetooth Connect without cables
simplifies that down to about 250
pages and is a very good description
of what Bluetooth is and how to use it.